My name is Joachim, and I want to talk about the solar neutrino problem as well as introduce you to the phenomenon of neutrino oscillations. 

First I want to cover some basic neutrino properties we’ll need, most of which we’ve already heard about in last week’s presentation on the comet experiment. Then on to the neutrinos produced in the sun, the experiments detecting them and a theoretical description of neutrino oscillations, that will explain the solar neutrino problem, which we will encounter along the way. 

Well, you’ve all seen this one before and today we are once again in the lepton group. It can be divided into three so called flavours, electron muon and tau. Each contains a charged lepton – most prominently the electron – and its associated, electrically neutral neutrino. For each flavour, there is also a flavour charge carried by all leptons. The individual flavour charges are conserved quantities, which means that the total number of, say electron flavour particles, doesn’t change. We’ll see how this works in some examples later on.
Lastly, neutrinos aren’t rare. The total flux of solar neutrinos on earth is about 70 billion neutrinos per cm2 every second, but they can easily travel through lightyears of massive lead without any interaction. Thus detecting them poses some serious experimental challenges and makes neutrinos by far the most elusive particles we have yet discovered.

But before we turn to the experiments that managed to do this, what neutrinos are we even expecting from the sun? For that we will have to take a closer look at the proton-fusion cycle. There also exists another fusion cycle in the sun, the CNO-cycle, that produces some neutrinos aswell; but it only contributes about 1% to the entire flux, its much more prominent in heavier stars.
Of course I will not go through all these fusion reactions, but measuring the neutrino flux can help us verify our understanding of all the fusion rates and branching probabilities here.
I’ve highlighted the neutrinos and the first thing we notice, is that they are all electron neutrinos. Secondly, the first fusion step, the initial proton-fusion already produces a neutrino, so the overall reaction rate of the entire fusion process is strongly associated with the neutrino flux from this particular reaction. Since 85% of the time there are no further neutrinos, this is also the reaction that produces by far the most neutrinos, albeit with very low energies.
Speaking of which, here you can see the amount of neutrinos from the individual fusion processes with respect to their energies; also note the logarithmic axes.  And out of all the other neutrinos, I only want you to focus on two reactions:
First these pp-neutrinos I mentioned with very small energies below 0.5 MeV from the initial proton fusion, whose entire flux is at least an order of magnitude above all the other processes. And second the B-8-neutrinos, produced in the decay of Boron-8 with high energies well above 10 MeV. Due to their high energies, these are actually most frequently observed in the experiments, despite the relatively low flux. 

With that in mind, let’s turn to those experiments, beginning with the first detection of solar neutrinos by the Homestake collaboration. As a short disclaimer, I will have to gloss over a lot of experimental intricacies, that the scientists had to overcome. This may make these experiments look a lot simpler than they really are.
Anyway, ignoring everything else on the picture, Homestake is basically this huge 380 m3 tank filled with a common chlorine-rich cleaning fluid, so nothing too fancy, really. But a chlorine-37 isotope can capture an electron neutrino and undergo inverse beta-decay to form 37-Argon. And this reaction also releases an electron, since we have to conserve the electric, but also the flavour charge. Remember, the flavour charge must be conserved, so if we absorb an electron flavour lepton, we also have to release one. And the energy threshold is above the proton-fusion energies, so they mostly detected neutrinos from the Boron-8 decay I mentioned.
Now, to get a sense of scale for the result; we have 380 m3 of chlorine bombarded by billions of neutrinos per cm2 every second, and still only a single neutrino capture was observed within two to three days. So they had to find single argon atoms in 380 m3 of chlorine. Now, this is a very tiny rate, in fact, it is even smaller than predicted. They only saw about a third of the smallest possible prediction by John Bahcall and others. And this discrepancy would come to be known as “the solar neutrino problem”.

Now not a lot happened until the water-cherenkov detector Kamiokande almost 20 years later in 1987 managed to detect solar neutrinos using a very different method. Actually, it was built to observe proton decay, which they never saw, but they saw neutrinos instead. Usually the detector here is filled with 3 kilotons of water. But how does it work? Well neutrinos can scatter off the electrons in the water, accelerating them beyond the speed of light in water. And when a particle moves faster through a medium than the speed of light in that medium, it emits cherenkov-radiation, named after its discoverer; so this takes care of the second part of the detector name. This radiation is emitted in a cone-like shape along the electron trajectory, and here you can see what such an event looks like in the detector, you get these rings of light. 
Now Kamiokande did three things:
Since the scattering angles are relatively small, they could show that most neutrinos really were coming from the sun; 1987 is special however, because the supernova sn87a, that we will here much about next week, was also coming with a huge neutrino burst. However, this meant that neutrino decay could not possibly explain the solar neutrino problem, because if we see any neutrinos from a supernova 160.000 lightyears away, there is no way that enough neutrinos could decay from sun to earth to explain the discrepancy. However, most important of course was the confirmation of said discrepancy. So the ratio between observed and predicted neutrinos was about 45%, solidifying the neutrino problem.

Around this time there’s also been another radiochemical detector named Gallex, similar to Homestake. They as well used an inverse beta-decay, only that here the electron neutrino transforms a 71 Gallium nucleus into a 71 Germanium nucleus, but with a much lower energy threshold of only 0.23 MeV. Remember that this is below the average proton-fusion neutrino energy of about 0.4 MeV, allowing for the first measurements of this process. Thus they could prove, that at least 90% of the total fusion energy is produced by this reaction. But still, they only detected about 60% of the expected result. I am sure you noticed that there is also a discrepancy between the results of the individual experiments, but the explanation of this will have to wait. 

Now let’s turn to the experiment that resolved the solar neutrino problem, the Sudbury neutrino observatory – SNO. 
Just like Kamiokande, SNO is a water-cherenkov detector. On the left we have a picture taken during the construction phase, as you can see the net of light sensors isn’t quite finished here. And on the right is a photo from the bottom of the detector looking up, just to draw a visual connection to the experiment.
Now, the idea with SNO was to build a detector that could measure all neutrino flavours, not just the electron neutrinos. Now this might seem a bit weird, because earlier I said that only electron neutrinos were produced in the sun, so why would we expect anything else, but bear with me here.
The big difference to Kamiokande is that they used heavy water as a target material, which is just ordinary water, where the hydrogen atoms have an additional neutron in their nucleus. 
Now there are a two distinct reactions possible: 
First, there is the so called charged-current reaction: It’s similar to what happened in the other experiments, but I will go about it a bit differently this time. Let’s say that any flavour neutrino comes in and transform the neutron to a proton. Now we have to conserve the electric charge, but the energy is too low to create muons or tau particles. Thus, an electron has to be released here. The cherenkov-radiation from this electron is then detected by the light sensors. But if we get an electron flavour particle out of this reaction, the flavour charge conservation then tells us that only an electron neutrino can trigger the reaction, because we have to put an electron flavour particle in. 
The key observation is, that heavy water also allows for a second, so called neutral current reaction, which this time really all neutrino flavours can trigger with equal probability. So this index x represents any of the three flavours. The neutrino simply comes in and breaks up the deuteron into a proton and a neutron, without creating any electric charge imbalance. Hence, the neutrino can just scatter off into a new direction, without violating any flavour charge conservation. Now the methods of actually detecting this neutron here are a bit complicated in detail, so there is a lot more to this, but it gives you a picture of the underlying idea.
And this is what they found: The red bar represents the measurement of the CC, the charged-current reaction, which is only about a third of the solar model prediction. However, the blue bar is where things get interesting. The combined neutrino flux of all three flavours from the neutral-current reaction is pretty much spot on the theoretical prediction. So the electron neutrinos aren’t missing, somehow they just changed their flavour. Now from an experimental point of view we’re done, but how can we make sense of this oscillation theoretically?

The key insight to understand neutrino oscillations is to take on a different point of view. To explain the mechanism we have to introduce three different mass-eigenstates of the neutrinos, ny1, ny2 and ny3. The three flavour neutrinos are then expressed as superpositions of different proportions of these mass-eigenstates. Alright, that needs some explaining:
Mathematically, an eigenstate is somewhat similar to an eigenvector, and we are basically making a change of basis here, changing from a flavour, to an eigenbasis. What this means is, that each flavour neutrino nya is a sum over the mass-eigenstates nyj, where for each flavour Uaj describes the transformation coefficients. This idea is illustrated in the picture: For example we say that the electron neutrino is mostly associated with the mass-1-eigenstate, which is represented by this larger sphere here. 
Now, when I first saw this it left me thinking: but why? Why would you make this assumption? To motivate this a bit, take light as an analogy. For light we have even three different descriptions: We have geometric, wave and quantum optics, describing the same physical phenomenon of light. But in some cases, one is much more appropriate, than another. For example you just cannot explain the interference pattern in the double slit experiment with geometric optics. However, it arises very naturally from the math, when we assume that light is a wave.
With neutrinos, it’s very similar; if we talk about interactions with other particles, the flavour description is nice, because we have these conservation laws, we know that the number of particles of each flavour has to be conserved; but if we want to describe the propagation of neutrinos, we have to change to the description via mass-eigenstates. Because this leads to neutrino oscillations being a much more natural consequence of the underlying math, just like with the wave description of light explaining the interference patterns. 
But, where do we actually find the oscillations? First you can show that the energies of the mass-eigenstates depend on their mass. You may also know that the frequency of the wave-like description of a particle is proportional to its energy. So assuming that the eigenstates have different masses, we get different frequencies, which means that out flavour neutrinos are superpositions of waves with different frequencies. 
Now to illustrate this, we make the so called two flavour approximation, in which we have only electron and muon neutrinos, as well as two mass-eigenstates. As you can see here, the electron neutrino then becomes a sum of ny1 and ny2, where theta is called the vacuum mixing angle, and is just a fixed parameter. 
What this means is, that at say t equals zero, the superposition of the mass-eigenstates looks just like an electron neutrino, it is an electorn neutrino. But due to the differences in frequency, after travelling some distance, the interference pattern of these two waves will change, until for example here, it looks just like a muon neutrino. But of course the pattern also oscillates back again, so when we reach a phase difference of two pi, we also get our electron neutrino back. 
From this, one can derive the probability of detecting an electron neutrino, as an electron neutrino after it has travelled a distance x. This is called the survival probability, and as you can see it depends on the mixing angle theta, as well as the mass difference between the eigenstates. We also notice that the oscillation length, so the distance after which the neutrino is back to its electron state, is only about 30 km. But that’s miniscule! If I showed you a plot from the whole distance from sun to earth, you could only see a blue box. Thus, it’s more useful to look at the average survival probability, which is about 58%. This is very close to the Gallex results, so not too bad. But all the other experiments saw a completely different value, which is certainly fishy. After all SNO resolved the solar neutrino problem, right?

The point is, that I have so far disregarded any matter effects. And from here it gets less intuitive, so to compensate for that, we’ll have to look at a bit more math – sorry. 
The underlying idea comes from the fact, that electron neutrinos are about 5 times more likely to scatter off electrons, than the other flavour neutrinos. This means, that there is a potential difference for electron neutrinos, compared to the other flavours, that is proportional to the enormous electron density in the sun. Also, it turns out that you only have to consider potential differences.
This H flavour vacuum term is called Hamiltonian of the vacuum in the flavour basis. And all you need to know about this, is that one can derive the vacuum oscillations from this Hamiltonian. Now, to describe the matter oscillations, we only have to add this so called charged-current potential to the Hamiltonian, in such a way that it only affects the electron neutrinos, which is why it only shows up in the first entry of this matrix. From here you would have to diagonalize this Hamiltonian, which leads to a new mixing angle theta m, that depends on the electron density, but also on the neutrino energy. Alright, that’s a lot to take in, so let’s look at some graphs to understand what’s really going on. 
Here you have a plot of the sin of two times the new mixing angle over the neutrino energy and also our equation for the electron neutrino with this new mixing angle. You can see that for energies below about 1 MeV the angle doesn’t change a lot, which is why the vaccum oscillations could describe the low-energy Gallex resuts. But when we go to 10 MeV, the sin of theta already exceeds 0.97 and looking at this equation, we find that our electron neutrino is now mostly associated with the mass-2-eigenstate. But now there will be no further oscillations, because they came from the idea that the electron neutrino was a superposition of different mass-states – now we have only one! And the probability to detect a pure mass-2-eigenstate as an electron neutrino, is sin squared of the vacuum mixing angle theta, and only about 30%, much closer to the results of Homestake and SNO.

Now, for the big conclusion the survival probability as a function of energy:
It starts at about 60%, which corresponds to the low-energy neutrinos measured by Gallex, and then drops down to 30% for the other experiments. The last thing I want to touch on, is the Kamiokande result, because their 45% for high-energy neutrinos doesn’t seem to fit in here. But, since they were using neutrino electron scattering, their detector also saw some muon and tau neutrinos. What this means is, that the expected result would be the 30% from the electron neutrinos plus a fifth of the remaining 70% muon and tau neutrinos, because they also have a chance to scatter off electrons, just a smaller one. Then you arrive at 44%, which is much closer to the experimental value.
